Docs: Expand FAQ for 2.0 launch (#4314)
clockworklabs/SpacetimeDB: docs/docs/00100-intro/00100-getting-started/00500-faq.md

A traditional database stores data and lets you query it. Your application logic runs in a separate server that connects to the database over the network.

SpacetimeDB holds all data in memory for sub-millisecond access, runs your application logic inside the database as WebAssembly modules, and pushes real-time updates to connected clients automatically. It's purpose-built for real-time applications, not batch processing or analytics.

---

## Architecture

### How does data persistence work?

SpacetimeDB holds all data in memory for fast access, but persists everything to a commit log (similar to a write-ahead log). On restart, the database replays the commit log to recover its exact state. You get the speed of in-memory computing with the durability of a traditional database.

### How does real-time sync work?

Clients subscribe to SQL queries that specify what data they care about. SpacetimeDB evaluates these subscriptions and pushes incremental updates whenever the underlying data changes. On the client side, the SDK maintains a local cache that mirrors the server state — you query this cache directly with no round trips.

```typescript
// Client subscribes to nearby players

> ctx.subscribe("SELECT * FROM players WHERE distance(x, y, ?, ?) < 100", myX, myY);

Reviewer: This is not the correct syntax. Check the docs for correct syntax.

### How do I handle authentication?

SpacetimeDB uses the [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) standard. You can use SpacetimeDB's built-in auth provider (SpacetimeAuth), or integrate with any OpenID Connect provider (Google, Auth0, etc.). Every reducer call includes the caller's `Identity`, which you can use for authorization logic.

### What are Views?

Views are read-only functions that compute derived data from your tables. They're like SQL views but written in your module's language. Clients can subscribe to views just like tables, and they update automatically when the underlying data changes.

### What are Procedures?

Procedures are like reducers but with additional capabilities — they can make HTTP requests to external services and manually manage transactions. They're currently in beta. Use reducers for most use cases; use procedures when you need to interact with the outside world.

---

## Deployment & Operations

### How do I deploy to production?

> You can deploy to the SpacetimeDB cloud (maincloud) with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can deploy to our managed cloud service, SpacetimeDB Maincloud, with:
```

We should link to the pricing page and talk a bit about the benefits of using Maincloud.

```bash
spacetime publish my-app --server maincloud
```

Or self-host SpacetimeDB and publish to your own server.

### Can I update my module without downtime?

Yes. When you `spacetime publish` an update, SpacetimeDB hot-swaps the module code. Connected clients are **not** disconnected — they seamlessly continue with the new logic. This is possible because all state lives in tables, not in the server process.

### How do I handle schema migrations?

When you publish an updated module, SpacetimeDB compares the new schema with the existing one and performs automatic migrations for compatible changes (adding tables, adding columns with defaults, etc.). For breaking changes, you may need to publish with `--delete-data` during development or implement manual migration logic in your `init` reducer.

### Is there a size limit for databases?

SpacetimeDB holds all data in memory, so the practical limit is the available RAM on the host. On the hosted cloud, resource limits depend on your plan. For self-hosted deployments, you control the hardware.

### How much does SpacetimeDB cost?

> SpacetimeDB is free to use during the current beta period, including the hosted cloud. Pricing for production workloads will be announced separately.

Reviewer: All this information is available on https://spacetimedb.com/pricing

- **Third-party providers**: Any OIDC-compliant provider works, including [Auth0](https://auth0.com/), [Clerk](https://clerk.com/), [Keycloak](https://www.keycloak.org/), Google, GitHub, and others.

See [Authentication](/authentication) for full details.

### Can I use `Identity` as a 1-to-1 mapping with users?

Yes, and this is the recommended approach. Each authenticated user receives a stable `Identity` that persists across sessions. You can store user profiles keyed by `Identity` and use it as your primary user identifier. If you use an OIDC provider (such as SpacetimeAuth, Auth0, or Clerk), the `Identity` is derived from the provider's tokens, so the same user always gets the same `Identity`.

### Can I store passwords in a private table and have users log in by calling a reducer?

No. SpacetimeDB does not currently support private reducer arguments. Any subscriber to your module can observe reducer arguments. Use OIDC-based authentication instead, where the identity provider handles credential verification and issues tokens that SpacetimeDB validates.

### How do I create a new localhost identity?

> Send a `POST /v1/identity` request to your SpacetimeDB instance. The response includes a new identity and token. See the [HTTP API reference](/http/identity#post-v1identity) for details.

Reviewer: This should come with a big caveat that this is not recommended for most applications. The identities issued by SpacetimeDB acting as an identity provider/issuer are tied to a single token which does not expire. If that token is lost, no one can authenticate as that identity.

It's recommended to use this route in development only, or if you're an advanced user and understand the consequences.

### How do I subscribe to data related to a specific `Identity`?

Write a subscription query that filters by the identity's hex representation:

```typescript
conn.subscriptionBuilder().subscribe(
  `SELECT * FROM messages WHERE sender = 0x${identityHex}`
);
```

---

## Schema & Migrations

### How do I handle schema migrations?

When you publish an updated module, SpacetimeDB compares the new schema with the existing one and performs automatic migrations for compatible changes (adding tables, adding columns with defaults, etc.). For breaking changes, you may need to publish with `--delete-data` during development. See [Automatic Migrations](/databases/automatic-migrations) for details on what changes are supported.

### How do I add a column to an existing table?

> SpacetimeDB does not currently support adding or removing columns from existing tables through automatic migration. Use the [incremental migration pattern](/databases/incremental-migrations) instead: create a new table with the desired schema and lazily migrate rows from the old table as they are accessed.

Reviewer: SpacetimeDB does now support adding columns to the end of tables with default values (see docs on default values).

---

## Troubleshooting

### I'm getting a 401/403 when publishing. What is wrong?

Database names are global on Maincloud. If someone else already published a database with that name, you will get an authorization error. Try a more unique name.

### My `spacetime generate` command gives a confusing error

If your module's `init` reducer panics (for example, due to a unique constraint violation on re-publish), `spacetime generate` may show an unhelpful error like "EOF while parsing a value at line 1 column 0". Fix the runtime error in your module first, then generate again.

### How do I reset my database during development?

Use `spacetime publish my-app --delete-data` to clear all data and republish. Or use `spacetime dev`, which handles this automatically with the `--delete-data=on-conflict` flag.

### I updated SpacetimeDB and now I cannot publish!

If you upgraded from a pre-1.0 version, your local data format may be incompatible. Delete your local SpacetimeDB data directory and start fresh:

```bash
rm -rf ~/.spacetime
spacetime start
```

### I got a weird error when compiling my module!

> Make sure you are using the same version of the SpacetimeDB module library (e.g., `spacetimedb` Rust crate, `@clockworklabs/spacetimedb-sdk` npm package, or `SpacetimeDB.ClientSDK` NuGet package) as the version of the SpacetimeDB host you are publishing to. Version mismatches between the module library and the host are a common source of confusing compilation or publish errors.

Reviewer: The npm package is `spacetimedb`
